# Airline Delay Analysis
## by Parshant Sharma


# Motivation

### In 2008 more than 10 million flights were made in the United States, not all of these flights depart on time, what happens to these flights? Are they diverted or canceled? What are the causes main cancellation of these flights? ✈️

Flight delay has been a bottleneck for many travellers and flight carriers. Most times, the reason for delaying a flight is beyond these carriers. However, these delays affect travellers on getting to their destination at the appropriate time.


Hence, the insights retrieved from this project can contribute in the form of a prototype in helping airlines to identify operational variables that contribute to delays in any airline company.

## Library Used

The library used includes pandas for data structure and reading data into notebook, numpy for mathematical analysis, seaborn and matplotlib for data visualization and scikitlearn for statistics. 

## Dataset
Due to file size limitations, I wasnt able to upload the dataset used here.  
Link: https://we.tl/t-92Mwx3NDog

## Data description

We have information on 1,936,757 flights that present delays and 30 variables that describe the delay time in departure, arrival or during the flight, the causes of the flight and the day of the year when the delay occurred. 

## Data Preprocessing

The data used contained no missing values, hence the was no need for hanling missing values. However, some columns were reported in a way that may not provide enough information, more features were extracted from the existing features.

## Exploration Summary

-   I had some assumptions going into my exploration of the flights data and I was quite surprised on a number of them. After comparing the 1988 and 2008 datasets at the initial part of my exploration, I decided for dig deeper into the 2008 dataset, as they were both very similar. Probably the biggest thing that surprised me, despite how often you hear about delays at the airport, is that flights in 2008 on average are departing and arriving a few minutes early.

-   Another aspect of the analysis that surprised me was how on July 4, Thanksgiving and Christmas there is lowest levels of flight delay time, due to the low demand for them, but the following or previous days present the highest levels of delay. of flights due to the increase in operations generated by people trying to fly home

-   The airline with the most delays are Southwest Airlines, followed by American Airlines. The three airports with the most flight delays are Atlanta (ATL), Chicago (ORD) and Dallas (DFW) of 303 airports in the dataset.

-   Out of 1929004 flights that are delayed, only 7754 (<1%) are canceled, Of those 633 canceled flights, 307 were due to time, 246 by carrier and 80 by security.

-   In summary, despite huge technological advances in the world, many things about air travel have remained the same. I'd be interested to dig into a 2019 flight dataset; however, 2008 was the last one available on the RITA website. Safety is the main concern for air travel; if we're able to average arriving a few minutes early, I'd consider that a huge success.

